WIP: getting started on supporting `nonlocal` statements (#19112)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/ty_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/scopes/nonlocal.md

Reviewer: these tests are fantastically thorough -- thank you!

Reviewer 2: Yeah, nice tests!

        def h():
            reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[1]
```

## The `nonlocal` keyword

> Without the `nonlocal` keyword, `x += 1` is not allowed in an inner scope, even if we break it up

Reviewer: "`x += 1` is not allowed in an inner scope" feels a bit confusing to me here -- this would obviously be allowed, because here `x` is unambiguously a local variable within the scope of `g`:

```py
def f():
    x = 1
		def g():
		    x = 1
		    x += 1
```

Author: d473f0e1dcb27d3b4cee0f648b5cde241c762819

into multiple steps. Local variable scoping is "foward-looking" in the sense that even a _later_
assignment of `x` means that _all_ reads of `x` in that scope only look at that scope's binding:

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        x += 1  # error: [unresolved-reference]

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        y = x  # error: [unresolved-reference]
        x = y + 1
```

> With `nonlocal` these examples work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `nonlocal` these examples work, because the reassignments modify the variable from the outer scope rather than modifying a separate variable local to the inner scope.
```

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        x += 1
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[2]

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        y = x
        x = y + 1
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[2]

def f():
    x = 1
    y = 2
    def g():
        nonlocal x, y
        reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[1]
        reveal_type(y)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[2]
```

## `nonlocal` declarations must match an outer binding

`nonlocal x` isn't allowed when there's no binding for `x` in an enclosing scope:

```py
def f():
    def g():
        nonlocal x  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `x` found"

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x, y  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `y` found"
```

> A global `x` doesn't work either; it has to be a function-like scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A global `x` doesn't work either; the outer-scope binding for the variable has to originate from a function-like scope:
```

```

## `nonlocal` uses the closest binding

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        x = 2
        def h():
            nonlocal x
            reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[2]
```

## `nonlocal` "chaining"

Multiple `nonlocal` statements can "chain" through nested scopes:

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        def h():
            nonlocal x
            reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[1]
```

And the `nonlocal` chain can skip over a scope that doesn't bind the variable:

```py
def f1():
    x = 1
    def f2():
        nonlocal x
        def f3():
            # No binding; this scope gets skipped.
            def f4():
                nonlocal x
                reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[1]
```

But a `global` statement breaks the chain:

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        global x
        def h():
            nonlocal x  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `x` found"
```

## `nonlocal` bindings respect declared types from the defining scope

By default (without `nonlocal`), an inner variable shadows an outer variable of the same name, and

> type declarations from outer scope don't apply to the inner one:

Author: 04efabb84

            x = 2
```

For the same reason, using the `+=` operator in an inner scope is an error without `nonlocal`
(unless you shadow the outer variable first):

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        x += 1  # error: [unresolved-reference] "Name `x` used when not defined"

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        x = 1
        x += 1  # allowed, but doesn't affect the outer scope

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        x += 1  # allowed, and affects the outer scope
```

## `nonlocal` declarations must match an outer binding

`nonlocal x` isn't allowed when there's no binding for `x` in an enclosing scope:

```py
def f():
    def g():
        nonlocal x  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `x` found"

def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x, y  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `y` found"
```

A global `x` doesn't work. The target must be in a function-like scope:

```py
x = 1

def f():
    def g():
        nonlocal x  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `x` found"

def f():
    global x
    def g():
        nonlocal x  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `x` found"
```

> A class-scoped `x` also doesn't work:

Author: Thanks! 3aaed2385744667b3d188b1a9084802095d163f9

```py
def f():
    x: int
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        x = "string"  # error: [invalid-assignment] "Object of type `Literal["string"]` is not assignable to `int`"
```

## A complicated mixture of `nonlocal` chaining, empty scopes, and the `global` keyword

```py
def f1():
    # The original bindings of `x`, `y`, and `z` with type declarations.
    x: int = 1
    y: int = 1
    z: int = 1

    def f2():
        # This scope doesn't touch `x`, `y`, or `z` at all.

        def f3():
            # This scope treats declares `x` nonlocal and `y` as global, and it shadows `z` without
            # giving it a new type declaration.
            nonlocal x
            x = 2
            global y
            y = 2
            z = 2

            def f4():
                # This scope sees `x` from `f1` and `z` from `f3`, but it doesn't see `y` at all,
                # because of the `global` keyword above.
                nonlocal x, y, z  # error: [invalid-nonlocal] "no binding for nonlocal `y` found"
                x = "string"  # error: [invalid-assignment]
                z = "string"  # not an error

> ```

Reviewer 2: Here's another combination of nested functions and classes with type declarations.

```python
def f():
    x: int = 1

    class Foo:
        x: str = ""

        @staticmethod
        def g():
            nonlocal x
            x = 1  # not an error
            x = ""  # error: [invalid-assignment]
```

Author: also 3aaed2385744667b3d188b1a9084802095d163f9

        def h():
            reveal_type(x)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal[1]
```

> ## The `nonlocal` keyword

Author: This new test is currently passing. Yay.

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        x += 1  # error: [unresolved-reference]
```

Without the `nonlocal` keyword, `x += 1` (or `x = x + 1` or `x = foo(x)`) is not allowed in an inner
scope like this. It might look like it would read the outer `x` and write to the inner `x`, but it
actually tries to read the not-yet-initialized inner `x` and raises `UnboundLocalError` at runtime.

```py
def f():
    x = 1
    def g():
        nonlocal x
        x += 1
```

> ## TODO: get the write to land in the right scope

Author: From here on down, it's not currently passing. These are the bits I need help with.
